SED command in UNIX stands for stream editor and it can perform lots of functions on file like searching, find and replace, insertion or deletion. 
Though most common use of SED command in UNIX is for substitution or for find and replace. 
By using SED you can edit files even without opening them, which is much quicker way to find and replace something in file, 
than first opening that file in VI Editor and then changing it.

SED is a powerful text stream editor. Can do insertion, deletion, search and replace(substitution).
SED command in unix supports regular expression which allows it perform complex pattern matching.

Syntax:

sed OPTIONS... [SCRIPT] [INPUTFILE...] 

Example:
Consider the below text file as an input.

$cat > file.txt
unix is great os. unix is opensource. unix is free os.
learn operating system.
unix linux which one you choose.
unix is easy to learn.unix is a multiuser os.Learn unix .unix is a powerful.

1. Replacing or substituting string : Sed command is mostly used to replace the text in a file. 
The below simple sed command replaces the word “unix” with “linux” in the file.

$sed 's/unix/linux/' file.txt
Output :
linux is great os. unix is opensource. unix is free os.
learn operating system.
linux linux which one you choose.
linux is easy to learn.unix is a multiuser os.Learn unix .unix is a powerful.

Here the “s” specifies the substitution operation. The “/” are delimiters. The “unix” is the search pattern and the “linux” is the replacement string.
By default, the sed command replaces the first occurrence of the pattern in each line and it won’t replace the second, third…occurrence in the line.


2. Replacing the nth occurrence of a pattern in a line : Use the /1, /2 etc flags to replace the first, second occurrence of a pattern in a line. 
The below command replaces the second occurrence of the word “unix” with “linux” in a line.

$sed 's/unix/linux/2' file.txt
Output:

unix is great os. linux is opensource. unix is free os.
learn operating system.
unix linux which one you choose.
unix is easy to learn.linux is a multiuser os.Learn unix .unix is a powerful.

3.




